# Overview

1. Scenario: Your marketing team provided you and your data science team all of the product reviews for your ecommerce website.
2. You are partnering with them to create a data warehouse in BigQuery which joins together data from three sources:
    1. Website ecommerce data
    2. Product inventory stock levels and lead times
    3. Product review sentiment analysis

## Task 1. Create a new dataset to store your tables

1. To get started, create a new dataset titled **ecommerce** in BigQuery to store your tables.
2. In the left pane, click on the name of your BigQuery project
3. Click on the three dots next to your project name, then select Create dataset.
4. The Create dataset dialog opens.
5. Set the Dataset ID to **ecommerce**, leave all other options at their default values.
6. Click Create dataset.

## Task 2. Explore the product sentiment dataset

1. Your data science team has run all of your product reviews through the API and provided you with the average sentiment score and magnitude for each of your products.
2. The project with your marketing team's dataset is data-to-insights.
3. BigQuery public datasets are not displayed by default in BigQuery. The queries in this lab will use the **data-to-insights** dataset even though you cannot see it.
4. First, create a copy of the table that the data science team made so you can read it:
``` sql
create or replace TABLE ecommerce.products AS
SELECT
*
FROM
`data-to-insights.ecommerce.products`
```
5. Note: This is only for you to review, the queries in this lab will be using the data-to-insights project.
6. Click on the ecommerce dataset to display the products table.
7. Examine the data using **Preview** and **Schema** tabs
8. Navigate to the ecommerce > products dataset and click the **Preview** tab to see the data.
9. Create a query that shows the top 5 products with the most positive sentiment
10. In the Query Editor, write your SQL query.
``` sql
SELECT
  SKU,
  name,
  sentimentScore,
  sentimentMagnitude
FROM
  `data-to-insights.ecommerce.products`
ORDER BY
  sentimentScore DESC
LIMIT 5
```
11. Revise your query to show the top 5 products with the most negative sentiment and filter out NULL values.
``` sql
SELECT
  SKU,
  name,
  sentimentScore,
  sentimentMagnitude
FROM
  `data-to-insights.ecommerce.products`
WHERE sentimentScore IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY
  sentimentScore
LIMIT 5
```
## Task 3. Join datasets to find insights

1. Scenario: It's the first of the month and your inventory team has informed you that the orderedQuantity field in the product inventory dataset is out of date. They need your help to query the total sales by product for 08/01/2017 and reference that against the current stock levels in inventory to see which products need to be resupplied first.
2. Calculate daily sales volume by productSKU
3. Create a new table in your ecommerce dataset with the below requirements:
    1. Title it sales_by_sku_20170801
    2. Source the data from data-to-insights.ecommerce.all_sessions_raw
    3. Include only distinct results
    4. Return productSKU
    5. Return the total quantity ordered (productQuantity). Hint: Use a SUM() with a IFNULL condition
    6. Filter for only sales on 20170801
    7. ORDER BY the SKUs with the most orders first
    8. Possible solution:

``` sql
-- pull what sold on 08/01/2017
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170801 AS
SELECT
  productSKU,
  SUM(IFNULL(productQuantity,0)) AS total_ordered
FROM
  `data-to-insights.ecommerce.all_sessions_raw`
WHERE date = '20170801'
GROUP BY productSKU
ORDER BY total_ordered DESC #462 skus sold
```
4. Click on the sales_by_sku table, then click the Preview tab.
5. How many distinct product SKUs were sold?
    1. Answer: 462

6. Next, enrich your sales data with product inventory information by joining the two datasets.
7. Join sales data and inventory data
8. Using a JOIN, enrich the website ecommerce data with the following fields from the product inventory dataset:
``` sql
--# join against product inventory to get name
SELECT DISTINCT
  website.productSKU,
  website.total_ordered,
  inventory.name,
  inventory.stockLevel,
  inventory.restockingLeadTime,
  inventory.sentimentScore,
  inventory.sentimentMagnitude
FROM
  ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170801 AS website
  LEFT JOIN `data-to-insights.ecommerce.products` AS inventory
  ON website.productSKU = inventory.SKU
ORDER BY total_ordered DESC
```
9. Modify the query you wrote to now include:
10. A calculated field of (total_ordered / stockLevel) and alias it "ratio". Hint: Use SAFE_DIVIDE(field1,field2) to avoid dividing by 0 errors when the stock level is 0.
11. Filter the results to only include products that have gone through 50% or more of their inventory already at the beginning of the month
12. Possible solution:

``` sql
-- # calculate ratio and filter
SELECT DISTINCT
  website.productSKU,
  website.total_ordered,
  inventory.name,
  inventory.stockLevel,
  inventory.restockingLeadTime,
  inventory.sentimentScore,
  inventory.sentimentMagnitude,

  SAFE_DIVIDE(website.total_ordered, inventory.stockLevel) AS ratio
FROM
  ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170801 AS website
  LEFT JOIN `data-to-insights.ecommerce.products` AS inventory
  ON website.productSKU = inventory.SKU

--# gone through more than 50% of inventory for the month
WHERE SAFE_DIVIDE(website.total_ordered,inventory.stockLevel) >= .50

ORDER BY total_ordered DESC
```

## Task 4. Append additional records

1. Your international team has already made in-store sales on 08/02/2017 which you want to record in your daily sales tables.
2. Create a new empty table to store sales by productSKU for 08/02/2017
3. For the schema, specify the following fields:
    1. table name is ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170802
    2. productSKU STRING
    3. total_ordered as an INT64 field

``` sql
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170802
(
productSKU STRING,
total_ordered INT64
);
```
4. Confirm you now have two date-shared sales tables - use the dropdown menu next to the Sales_by_sku table name in the table results, or refresh your browser to see it listed in the left menu:
5. Two sales_by_sku tables highlighted in the ecommerce dataset
6. Insert the sales record provided to you by your sales team:
``` sql
INSERT INTO ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170802
(productSKU, total_ordered)
VALUES('GGOEGHPA002910', 101)
```
7. Confirm the record appears by previewing the table - click on the table name to see the results.
8. Append together historical data
9. There are multiple ways to append together data that has the same schema. Two common ways are using UNIONs and table wildcards.
10. Union is an SQL operator that appends together rows from different result sets.
11. Table wildcards enable you to query multiple tables using concise SQL statements. Wildcard tables are available only in standard SQL.
12. Write a UNION query that will result in all records from the below two tables:
    1. ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170801
    2. ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170802
``` sql
SELECT * FROM ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170801
UNION ALL
SELECT * FROM ecommerce.sales_by_sku_20170802
```
13. Note: The difference between a UNION and UNION ALL is that a UNION will not include duplicate records.
14. What is a pitfall of having many daily sales tables? You will have to write many UNION statements chained together.
15. A better solution is to use the table wildcard filter and _TABLE_SUFFIX filter.
16. Write a query that uses the (*) table wildcard to select all records from ecommerce.sales_by_sku_ for the year 2017.

``` sql
SELECT * FROM `ecommerce.sales_by_sku_2017*`
```
17. Modify the previous query to add a filter to limit the results to just 08/02/2017.
``` sql
SELECT * FROM `ecommerce.sales_by_sku_2017*`
WHERE _TABLE_SUFFIX = '0802'
```
18. Note: Another option to consider is to create a Partitioned Table which automatically can ingest daily sales data into the correct partition.

## Questions

1. How many Aluminum Handy Emergency Flashlights have been ordered?
    1. 66
    2. 90
    3. 0
    4. 85
2. What data type are the sentimentScore and sentimentMagnitude fields?
    1. FLOAT
    2. INTERGER
    3. STRING
    4. RECORD
3. What product has the highest sentiment?
    1. USB wired soundbar - in store only
    2. G Noise-reducing Bluetooth Headphones
    3. Stylus Pen w/ LED Light
    4. G Noise-reducing Bluetooth Headphones
4. What is the product with the lowest sentiment?
    1. 4 Womens Vintage Hero Tee Platinum
    2. Mens Vintage Henley
    3. 7 inch Dog Frisbee
    4. Womens Convertible Vest-Jacket Sea Foam Green
5. A UNION ALL join does not include duplicate records.
    1. True
    2. False
6. What is the name of the top selling product and what percent of its inventory has been sold already?
    1. Leather Journal-Black with 250 product orders out of 354 in stock
    2. Youth Short Sleeve Tee Red with a restocking leadtime of 9
    3. Android Infant Short Sleeve Tee Pewter with 7 product orders out of 2 in stock
    4. Click Check my progress to verify the objective.

## Answers
1. 1
2. 1
3. 1
4. 3
5. 2
6. 1
