# BigQuery in Command Line
## Overview
1. Storing and querying massive datasets can be time consuming and expensive without the right hardware and infrastructure.
2. BigQuery is a serverless, highly scalable cloud data warehouse that solves this problem by enabling super-fast SQL queries using the processing power of Google's infrastructure.
3. Simply move your data into BigQuery and let us handle the hard work.
4. You can control access to both the project and your data based on your business needs, such as giving others the ability to view or query your data.
5. You can access BigQuery by using the [Console](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/quickstarts/query-public-dataset-console), [Web UI](https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery?utm_source=bqui&utm_medium=link&utm_campaign=classic&project=cloud-solutions-group) or a [command-line tool](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/bq-command-line-tool) using a variety of client libraries such as Java, .NET, or Python.
6. There are also a variety of [solution providers](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/?hl=en) that you can use to interact with BigQuery.
7. This hands-on lab shows you how to use **bq**, the python-based command line tool for BigQuery, to query public tables and load sample data into BigQuery.
8. What you'll do
    1. Query a public dataset
    2. Create a new dataset
    3. Load data into a new table
    4. Query a custom table

## Task 1. Examine a table
1. BigQuery offers a number of sample tables that you can run queries against. In this lab, you'll run queries against the shakespeare table, which contains an entry for every word in every play.
2. To examine the schema of the Shakespeare table in the samples dataset, run:

``` sql
bq show bigquery-public-data:samples.shakespeare
```

## Task 2. Run the help command

1. When you include a command name with the help commands, you get information about that specific command.
2. For example, the following call to bq help retrieves information about the query command:
``` sql
bq help query
```
3. To see a list of all of the commands bq uses, run just **bq help**.

## Task 3. Run a query

1. Now you'll run a query to see how many times the substring "raisin" appears in Shakespeare's works.
2. To run a query, run the command bq query "[SQL_STATEMENT]":
3. Run the following standard SQL query in Cloud Shell to count the number of times that the substring "raisin" appears in all of Shakespeare's works:

``` sql
bq query --use_legacy_sql=false \
'SELECT
   word,
   SUM(word_count) AS count
 FROM
   `bigquery-public-data`.samples.shakespeare
 WHERE
   word LIKE "%raisin%"
 GROUP BY
   word'
```
4. In this command: --use_legacy_sql=false makes standard SQL the default query syntax.
5. Output:


|     word      | count |
|---------|-------|
| praising      |     8 |
| Praising      |     4 |
| raising       |     5 |
| dispraising   |     2 |
| dispraisingly |     1 |
| raisins       |     1 |

6. If you search for a word that isn't in Shakespeare's works, no results are returned.
7. Run the following search for "huzzah", returns no matches:
``` sql
bq query --use_legacy_sql=false \
'SELECT
   word
 FROM
   `bigquery-public-data`.samples.shakespeare
 WHERE
   word = "huzzah"'
```

## Task 4. Create a new table

1. Now create your own table. Every table is stored inside a dataset. A dataset is a group of resources, such as tables and views.
2. Create a new dataset
3. Use the bq ls command to list any existing datasets in your project:
``` sql
bq ls
```
4. You will be brought back to the command line since there aren't any datasets in your project yet.
5. Run bq ls and the bigquery-public-data Project ID to list the datasets in that specific project, followed by a colon (:):
``` sql
bq ls bigquery-public-data:
```
6. Now create a dataset. A dataset name can be up to 1,024 characters long, and consist of A-Z, a-z, 0-9, and the underscore, but it cannot start with a number or underscore, or have spaces.
7. Use the bq mk command to create a new dataset named babynames in your project:
``` sql
bq mk babynames
```

8. Run bq ls to confirm that the dataset now appears as part of your project:
``` sql
bq ls
```

9. Upload the dataset:Before you can build the table, you need to add the dataset to your project. The custom data file you'll use contains approximately 7 MB of data about popular baby names, provided by the US Social Security Administration.
10. Run this command to add the baby names zip file to your project, using the URL for the data file:
``` curl
curl -LO http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/babynames/names.zip
```
11. List the file:
``` sql
ls
```
12. You can see the name of the file added to your project.
13. Now unzip the file:
``` sql
unzip names.zip
```
14. That's a pretty big list of text files! List the files again:
``` sql
ls
```
15. The bq load command creates or updates a table and loads data in a single step.
16. You will use the bq load command to load your source file into a new table called names2010 in the babynames dataset you just created. By default, this runs synchronously, and will take a few seconds to complete.
17. The bq load arguments you'll be running are:
    1. datasetID: babynames
    2. tableID: names2010
    3. source: yob2010.txt
    4. schema: name:string,gender:string,count:integer
18. Create your table:
``` sql
bq load babynames.names2010 yob2010.txt name:string,gender:string,count:integer
```
19. Run bq ls and babynames to confirm that the table now appears in your dataset:
``` sql
bq ls babynames
```
20. Run bq show and your dataset.table to see the schema:
``` sql
bq show babynames.names2010
```
## Task 5. Run queries
1. Now you're ready to query the data and return some interesting results.
2. Run the following command to return the top 5 most popular girls names:
``` sql
bq query "SELECT name,count FROM babynames.names2010 WHERE gender = 'F' ORDER BY count DESC LIMIT 5"
```

|   name   | count |
|----------|-------|
| Isabella | 22913 |
| Sophia   | 20643 |
| Emma     | 17345 |
| Olivia   | 17028 |
| Ava      | 15433 |

3. Run the following command to see the top 5 most unusual boys names:
``` sql
bq query "SELECT name,count FROM babynames.names2010 WHERE gender = 'M' ORDER BY count ASC LIMIT 5"
```
|   name   | count |
|----------|-------|
| Aaqib    |     5 |
| Aaidan   |     5 |
| Aadhavan |     5 |
| Aarian   |     5 |
| Aamarion |     5 |

## Task 7. Clean up
1. Run the bq rm command to remove the babynames dataset with the -r flag to delete all tables in the dataset:
``` sql
bq rm -r babynames
```
2. Confirm the delete command by typing Y.
